it's been 7 weeks since Israel began its
bombardment of the Gaza Strip leaving
more than 10,000 dead including
thousands of children but the violence
didn't just start in October it spans a
75e history from the creation of the
state of Israel in 1948 in this week's
upfront we'll take a look at this
history and The crucial context that's
needed to better understand what's
happening
today the state of Israel was
established in 1948 when at least
750,000 Palestinians were forced from
their homes many of them by Zionist
militias and what became known as the
NECA or catastrophe 75 years later as
Israel's war on Gaza rages on the
Palestinian struggle for
self-determination continues so how does
this history inform the current moment
to answer that question we'll speak to
Mustafa baruti he is co-founder of the
Palestinian national initiative a
political party in the occupied West
Bank a party that is not affiliated with
neither either F
nor also joins us she is a physician and
author and her latest book is titled one
state the only Democratic future for
Palestine Israel I want to thank you
both for joining me on up front I'm
going to start with you because you were
born in Jerusalem and you were in fact
among the more than
750,000 Palestinians who were forced to
leave their homes can you talk about
this time what you experienced having to
leave your home uh and also what
happened to your
family yeah indeed I was born in
Palestine before 1948 and before the NBA
now I was a child when we were forced
out of Jerusalem what I what I do
remember of that time was that it was uh
a real terror
uh fear everywhere uh nobody sure uh if
uh we could make it
from the the the part of Jerusalem will
lived in which was full of Zionist
snipers um and militias um it's very
important I think to remind people that
at the time that that happened in
1948 really no one amongst the
Palestinians who were either forced out
or or
fled no Palestinian actually believed
there would never be allowed back so
that was the second the other side of
the naar first the Force displacement
second the um the reality of not being
allowed to return so there we were um
forced into Exile and um in our case my
family you could say was a bit luckier
the most we didn't end up in a refugee
camp we ended up in England instead
because my father got a job uh here in
London and so it it's a terrible thing
to happen it's a terrible thing to do to
a people to force them from their homes
force them to go out of their country
and try and find some kind of lives for
themselves
elsewhere I always remember my mother uh
would say to us um when we you know when
it became clear we had to buy some stuff
for the house like a fridge or get some
proper Heating in my mother would say no
no we're not staying and this idea
remained prevalent for I would
say maybe up to 5 years before it
finally sank in that nobody was coming
to the rescue and we were not going to
be allowed to go home Mustafa it's now
been 75 years uh since the creation of
Israel 75 years that Palestinians have
been living in Exile holding on to keys
of their former homes like the one you
symbolically have when you're jacket uh
lapel and 75 years of failed
negotiations Israel continues to build
settlements in the West Bank while
blockading and now bombarding Gaza
looking at the history of this
occupation Mustafa uh has anything
changed yeah things changed to the worse
I never thought in my whole life that I
didn't live the period of the nakba but
of course I knew everything about it but
I never thought in my whole life that we
will see another nakba again or that
people will be uh forced to be
ethnically cleansed one more time uh I
thought we live now in a more civilized
world that there is a prevalence of
international law and we've been
receiving all this information from the
West about the respect of Human Rights
and democracy and all of the rest and we
believe that but I must admit it was
wrong because the reality today is that
another ethnic cleansing is taking place
in Gaza another Act of NBA another
catastrophe we are attacked by the most
advanced tanks of the West and uh the
disaster is
horrifying uh
1,200 families have been erased from the
Civil record completely you're talking
about no less than 15,000 people killed
up till now including almost 7,000
children and more than 30 29 30,000
people injured that's about 2% of the
total population of Gaza if that has
happened in a country like the United
States you would be talking about 6
million people injured or killed in less
than six weeks so yes and life under
occupation has been horrible because in
1967 as you know Israel occupied West
Bank and Gaza and since then we've been
living under the most terrible
occupation all my adult life I spent it
under Israeli occupation my father lived
under occupation I am living under
occupation my daughter is living under
occupation it's one generation after the
other deprived of our rights deprived of
our basic human rights and it goes on
and even getting worse because now
people in the West Bank are so
frightened that we could see also acts
of ethnic cleansing here since the
settlers who are now 750,000 people in
the West Bank armed and already
terrorizing Palestinians evicting up
till this moment 35 communities from
their land in the West Bank so you can
imagine the level of fear and worry that
people have that it's not just
occupation but also another potential
for another catastrophe another NBA
another occup another another ethnic
cleansing
the state of Israel was pushed forward
by the Zionist movement which emerged in
the late 1800s and evolved to become a
nation-building project uh in Palestine
with of course the support of European
countries uh you call the Zionist
project quote unworkable namely to set
up an ethnically defined Jewish only
Collective existing on a land belonging
to another people and to their
exclusion however Zionist posit that the
Jewish people have a right to
self-determination and they have a right
to statehood uh but is it necessary to
even frame self-determination in those
terms to frame it through the lens of uh
of a nation state well look the only
reason that Israel exists number one and
uh is maintained to this day number two
is entirely to do with Western support
if you think about it uh the the the aim
was to take take somebody else's country
uh expel those people thus creating a
space for a new set of people who were
Jews coming from different parts of the
world and and and declare that place uh
a state for Jews uh these immigrants
that are coming foreigners that are
coming from all over the world in uh in
a way in which uh uh the the only way
that a state like that could have been
created was by violence now that
violence and the expulsions it it it it
necessitated uh was going to make
enemies immediately of the whole region
uh so that's a very bad mistake to begin
with secondly the only way such a state
could survive because in the normal
course of things you see when people do
that in a particular area they're
rejected they're rejected by their
neighbors and they have
to make do with whatever they can and
they eventually tend to leave because it
doesn't work the only way that Israel
works is with in in
unstinting and persistent outside
support allow me to push back for a
moment because what the Zionist argument
would be is two things one that they
were already vulnerable globally as a
minority they have been subjected to
pograms they've been subjected to
violence and so they had to develop a
state for safety and they needed the
support of the West in order to make
that happen and they would say the
reason why it there is because they have
an ancestral tie that there's a
long-standing enduring Jewish presence
uh in historic Palestine and therefore
it's not an arbitrary choice but the
place where they're supposed to be what
do you say to that well I tell you what
I say there was no there was never an
objection to uh Jews there was no
objection to people coming into
Palestine in search of Refuge in search
of somewhere where they could be free
from persecution that's not the problem
that was never the problem the problem
was that they not only sought Refuge as
they claim but they actually wanted to
take the place over and they wanted to
exclude the people who actually already
lived there whatever they believe their
ancestral ties uh were to that
particular uh plot of land did not
entitle them to to kick out the people
living there uh uh at that moment and
did not entitle them to set themselves
up in the place of the people who lived
there that's the problem Mustafa let me
bring you in you look like you wanted to
respond to that as well yes well we have
to see the situation here is as follows
first of all the Zionist project is
about settler colonialism it's a settler
Colonial project when Herzel came up
with the idea that Jews have to be to
establish a state in
Palestine the the Jewish community in
Austria sent a delegation it's an
interesting story to dis to to to check
the situation in
Palestine uh and they came back he sent
two people and when they came back they
told him something very interesting they
said you know the pride is beautiful but
she's already married meaning there are
people already there but the whole
Zionist project was based on a very
false notion of land without people for
people without
land uh of course the Israeli the Jewish
people have suffered drastically because
of the
Holocaust it was the most terrible crime
they also suffered from the bogams in
Russia they suffered from anti-Semitism
in Europe but none of that was
practiced by Palestinians Palestinians
were never responsible for such horrible
behavor behavior on the contrary as said
Palestinians and Jewish people lived
together in in Harmony and no
persecution but the problem started when
the Zionist movement appeared and they
said to Palestinians this is not your
land you have to get out of here when
Israel was established when when when
balford declaration which gave the
foundation for this establishment was
declared the
Palestinians being 90% of the population
here own
98% of the land and the Jewish Community
which was a minority 10% owned only 2%
after Israel was established
Palestinians were deprived from their
land and now what remained of them in
the so-called Israel is on only 3.5% and
the rest went to the Israeli
establishment so this idea of grabbing
the land from others and then forcing
them out by by shooting them and killing
them is the problem and today this can
repeat again the solution is neither to
accept two-state solution which
Palestinians accepted and and and
although it wasn't fair because they
were accepting a state in less than half
of what the United Nations said they
should have still Israel doesn't accept
that the two-state solution and although
Palestinians accepted that Israel didn't
so the other solution would be one
Democratic state where we would live in
equality but they don't want two states
and they don't want Democratic State
what do they want they want ethnic
cleansing of
Palestinians and that is the policy of
this government which has fascists in it
like smotrich who says we should fill
the West Bank with settlements and
settlers so that Palestinians would lose
any hope of having a state of their own
and then they would have one of three
options either to immigrate which is
ethnic cleansing
or to accept a life of subjugation to
Israelis which is aparti or die that is
the problem that we are living through
not because we never refuse to live
together with Jewish people in one land
in one democratic system it is them who
insisted especially after passing that
law in the Israeli keset of Jewish state
law which says that the right of
self-determination in AIT Israel meaning
all of Palestine is exclusive for Jewish
people that is the problem racism here
the Jewish racism is the problem that is
preventing peace and preventing a
solution in this land uh Mustafa just
talked about different solutions one
state two State you just wrote a book uh
titled one state the only Democratic
future for Palestine Israel uh and you
have rejected the idea of a two-state
solution as a realistic one why is a
two-state solution unrealistic in your
estimation
well the two-state solution is
impossible for two very important
reasons first of all logistically if you
look at the map uh you will see that the
area which should form the Palestinian
state is pockmarked by Israeli
settlements until and unless uh western
states or those people who support the
two-state solution come forward and say
those settlements will be removed
therefore releasing a viable territory
for the pales Palestinian State unless
that happens we cannot talk about a
Palestinian State because there's no
territory on which to place it one two
in terms of the Justice uh and the
fairness of a solution like this what
the two-state solution proposes is that
four fifths of the land of Palestine
should remain with Israel and 1th 20%
22% should go to the Palestinian State
uh now the Palestinian people uh as
Mustafa quite rightly points out are
already in the area between the uh the
the sea the river and the Sea are
already in a majority 7.5 million uh as
opposed to 7 million so they're already
slightly more than half uh there are
other pal Ians people like me in Exile 5
to six million uh Palestinian refugees
living in un camps now those are also
they also have rights they also have the
right to live in their own state but it
can't be done uh in a fifth of the
original Palestine so in terms of equity
Justice and Logistics it's not a
possible solution so we really must stop
talking about it because it's been used
as a a soporific an anesthetic in which
uh you know to lull people into a belief
that something is being done or
something will be done for the
Palestinians don't worry there will be
two states and it's going to be fine
except that it's not happening and it's
not going to happen therefore where are
we going with this that was the the
question in my book what what what
what's the end of this the end of it it
seems to me to be very clear
we've got uh two communities living in
that area between the river and the Sea
um the Jewish Israelis Palestinian Arabs
um what more sensible and logical and
Humane and and fair than to for them to
all live together in equal citizenship
in one state which represents them
fairly that is a Democratic state in a
state like that all the Palestinians who
were expelled uh due to the creation of
Israel and who live in C is that not is
that not a political non is is that not
a political non-starter as well no
Israeli is going to accept that because
they would argue that that's demographic
destruction and that is the de the
destruction of the Jewish state which is
the very premise of Israel is that a
political non-starter as a practical
matter of course you'd say that of
course you'd say that everybody would
say that but I'm putting it to you and I
put it in the book very very clearly I
think that first of all there is this
idea do you I don't mean you personally
obviously but do people support the idea
of these two communities living together
in equality in a democracy that's the
first question and the second question
is how are we going to get there so in a
way what happens is one starts to talk
about this and immediately the second
question is thrown in one's face how is
it going to happen Israelis will never
accept it Etc let's just pause for a
moment let's take the idea in itself
isn't that the Natural end point to this
whole tragedy isn't it the Natural end
point the answer is of course yes it is
so the only question we need to ask is
how do we get there uh the the
trajectory that Israel is bent on now is
a complete dead end that's the
trajectory of of maintaining uh its
Presence by force of it trying to Chuck
the Palestinians are trying to kill them
trying to destroy their lives that is a
trajectory which has to come to an end
before you two go I have just uh one
more question for you it doesn't appear
that the International Community is
reigning uh the Israeli government in or
the Israeli military in uh what will
happen if Israel is successful in its
attempt to completely destroy Hamas and
also what will the future of the region
be uh I'll start with
you uh look first of all there's there's
an there's an assumption there which I
don't think we're entitled to make which
is that Israel might destroy Hamas now
I'm not saying that for for any partisan
reason at all I'm afraid the uh uh the
record so far is not encouraging for
Israel in terms of its victory over
Hamas however the but still the the the
question remains uh what is actually
going to H how is this going to play out
what is going to happen now I without
answering you directly I tell you what I
really do want to say it's that there
are certain things that are hidden here
in in in the discussions always about
Israel Palestine about this conflict
first that the Palestinians have been
fighting and are still fighting not just
Israel they're fighting Israel and the
whole of the western world that is
deeply unfair it's beyond the capacity
of any one group let alone a small
people to fight so many foes number one
number two there is a consensus in the
West on the
necessity uh on the essential nature of
maintaining Israel in the sort of
position that it is in now in other
words an Israel which is supremacist
which is dominant which uh smites its
enemies at the drop of a hat there is a
consensus in the West on maintaining
this kind of Israel why what does that
mean what does that say about you what
what is it that it takes that Israel is
doing for these western states that they
can't get in any other way except
through this extreme cruelty uh against
an innocent people the Palestinian
people the time has come to talk about
all this out into the open Mustafa well
unfortunately nobody looks at the fact
that Israel is conducting a war on
hospitals on children on infants in in
incubators nobody looks at the fact that
so many Palestinians are killed and
nobody looks at the fact that Israel is
about to conduct the worst kind of
catastrophe even worse than what
happened in
1948 and they still for continue to
support Israel I need to understand what
makes a country like the United States
of America or Britain or any other
European country refuse ceasefire but by
which law and let me tell you I came to
the conclusion that those people this
Criminal Mind that mindset that allowed
the Holocaust against Jewish people the
most horrible crime against Jewish
people the same mindset that allowed
persecution of Jewish people in a form
of anti-Semitism because they were weak
it's the same set of mind the same
mindset that is allowing now a
catastrophe and another Holocaust for
the Palestinians it's the same kind of
thinking and that should not be allowed
and that has to stop that has to stop
and and the way to achieve that is
immediate ceasefire today in Gaza
immediate stopping of these Israeli
settlers from committing their crimes
against Palestinians in the West Bank
and facing Israel with reality I agree
with what Gada said you want to State
solution you have to take out all the
settlers from the West Bank otherwise
there cannot be a solution cannot be
two-state solution you don't want two
State solution let's have one state
solution but to think that we the
Palestinians will ever accept to be
immigrants again to to to live another
catastrophe again or live under a system
of Oppression and aperti and be slaves
of occupation and aparti this will never
happen we will never accept to stop
struggling for our freedom for our
dignity and for our rights all right
that's all we have time for Mustafa
thank you both so much for joining me
everyone that is our show upfront we'll
be back next
week